feat: add adr-009 for state fraud proofs (#570)
rollkit/rollkit: docs/lazy-adr/adr-009-state-fraud-proofs.md

```protobuf
service ABCIApplication {
    rpc GetAppHash(RequestGetAppHash) returns (ResponseGetAppHash);
}

message RequestGetAppHash {}

message ResponseGetAppHash {
  bytes app_hash = 1;
}
```

This `GetAppHash` ABCI method returns an equivalent of `CommitID` hash in the ABCI method `Commit` and thus provides a way to extract ISRs from an app without doing any disk write operations.

Full nodes use these ISRs to detect fraudulent state transitions. A full node must also execute all state transitions (`BeginBlock`, `DeliverTx`, and `EndBlock` calls) and compute its own Intermediate State Roots (ISRs). After each state transition, a full node compares the corresponding ISR with the ISR given by the Sequencer. If it finds a mismatch between its own computed ISR and and one given by the Sequencer, a fraudulent transition is detected and it moves on to generate a Fraud Proof.

### Generating Fraud Proofs

We introduce the following ABCI method to enable Fraud Proof Generation in the Cosmos SDK:

```protobuf
service ABCIApplication {
    rpc GenerateFraudProof(RequestGenerateFraudProof) returns (ResponseGenerateFraudProof);
}
```

> With this new ABCI method, a Rollmint Full Node can send a request to a Cosmos SDK app to generate a Fraud Proof. In this request, it includes a list of all the state transitions from the start of the block upto the fraudulent state transition. The last non-nil state transition in this list corresponds to the fraudulent state transition.

Reviewer: [non-blocking] I am wondering: would it not also be possible to have the fraud proof logic entirely on the Cosmos SDK side rather than the rollmint side? eg the Cosmos SDK compares the ISRs for incoming blocks. Or would that be even more complicated?

Reviewer 2: I can see 2 issues.
1. Cosmos-SDK is more concerned about transactions and app state than blocks. It's informed about block beginning and ending (`BeginBlock`, `EndBlock`), but have no explicit information about number of transactions in the block, etc. It's the role of rollmint to call `DeliverTx` for each transaction; rollmint drives the communication with cosmos-sdk. Changing this flow would be complicated.
2. The more changes we introduce to cosmos-sdk, the harder it will be to keep a fork up to date.

```protobuf
message RequestGenerateFraudProof {
  // All state transitions upto and including the fraudulent state transition
  RequestBeginBlock begin_block_request = 1 [(gogoproto.nullable) = false];
  repeated RequestDeliverTx deliver_tx_requests = 2;
  RequestEndBlock end_block_request = 3;
}
```

The `GenerateFraudProof` method in the Cosmos SDK app receives this list of state transitions and takes the following steps to generate a fraud proof:

- Revert local state to the last committed state
- Execute all the non-fraudulent state transitions
- Remove all trace logs from executing the above state transitions

> - Execute the fraudulent state transition with tracing-enabled and store logs of what state, specifically key/value pairs, is accessed, modified, added, or removed during this fraudulent state transition.

Reviewer: [non-blocking] We also discussed before that another option would be to leave tracing enabled always, right? So then you wouldn't need to re-execute all the state transitions to generate a fraud proof.

Reviewer 2: I think this part will need to be updated in the future anyways, as our work-in-progress related to IAVL implementation details, shows that we need to change the direction slightly.

- Revert local state back to the last committed state
- Execute all the non-fraudulent state transitions again
- Use the stored logs to filter the local state down to the set of minimal set of key/value pairs needed to execute the fraudulent state transition and generate corresponding merkle inclusion proofs for the state.
- Put this minimal set of key/value pairs and corresponding merkle inclusion proofs in a State Fraud Proof which looks like this:

```protobuf

// Represents a single-round fraudProof
message FraudProof {
  // The block height during which the fraudulent state transition occured
  int64 block_height = 1;
  // Intermediate State Root right before the fraudulent state transition

>   bytes app_hash = 2;

Reviewer: As per my prior comments - it needs to be verified that the app hash is part of the rollup's data commitment, otherwise fraud proof generators could make up fake ISRs and transactions.

Reviewer 2: We keep this in mind. But first we need to complete https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/594 and 
https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/613.

  // Map from an app module name to a State Witness
  map<string, StateWitness> state_witness = 3;

> 

Reviewer: Don't you also need witnesses to the actual rollup transactions being fraud proven here?

Reviewer 2: We planned for this - see: https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/579, especially https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/580

  // Fraudulent state transition has to be one of these
  // Only one have of these three can be non-nil

>   RequestBeginBlock fraudulent_begin_block = 4;

Reviewer: It seems that the fraud proof generator is providing the transaction data, but this isn't secure without the verifier/light client actually verifying that that transaction (and the ISR) was actually part of the rollup's data commitment.

Reviewer 2: We planned for this - see: https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/579, especially https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/580 & https://github.com/celestiaorg/rollmint/issues/581

### Verifying Fraud Proofs

Rollmint light clients should be able to use these gossiped state fraud proofs to verify whether a fraudulent state transition occured or not by themselves. 

There are four stages of verification that must occur for a Fraud Proof. The first three stages take place in Rollmint and verify that the fraud proof itself was generated correctly. The fourth stage takes place in a Cosmos SDK app to actually execute the fraudulent state transition embedded in the fraud proof.

**Stage One**

Verify that both the `appHash` (ISR) and the fraudulent state transition in the `FraudProof` exist as part of a block published on the DA layer within a specified fraud proof window.

**Stage Two**

Go through the `state_witness` list in the `FraudProof` and verify that all the store level merkle inclusion proofs are valid: the corresponding `root_hash` was included in a merkle tree with root `appHash`.

**Stage Three**

Go through the `WitnessData` in each `StateWitness` and verify that all the substore level merkle inclusion proofs are valid: the corresponding `key` was included in a merkle tree with root `root_hash`.

**Stage Four**

> Spin up a new Cosmos SDK app and initialize its store with Deep Subtrees constructed using merkle inclusion proofs in the `FraudProof`. After this initialization, the app hash representing the state of the app should match the `appHash` inside the `FraudProof`. This store should now contain all the key/value pairs and underlying tree structure necessary to execute the fraudulent state transition contained in the `FraudProof`. 

Reviewer 2: [non-blocking]
I suggest using a bit more general term in here, as implementation may contain "non-inclusion-proofs", etc.

```suggestion
Spin up a new Cosmos SDK app and initialize its store with Deep Subtrees constructed using witness data in the `FraudProof`. After this initialization, the app hash representing the state of the app should match the `appHash` inside the `FraudProof`. This store should now contain all the key/value pairs and underlying tree structure necessary to execute the fraudulent state transition contained in the `FraudProof`. 
```

- Check for badly formatted underlying rollup data before verifying state transition inside the State Machine.
- Limit number of state witnesses permissible in a state fraud proof since state keys accessed by a transaction can be limited by the state machine.
- Write end to end network tests covering different scenarios that can occur in case of state fraud proof submission by a full node.
- Support for multiple sequencers, in which case, fraud proof detection works the same as described above.
- Support more ABCI-compatible State Machines, in addition to the Cosmos SDK state machine.

![State Fraud Proofs](./figures/state_fraud_proofs.png)

## Alternative Approaches

For light clients to detect invalid blocks and verify it themselves, alternatives include downloading the whole state themselves or using zero-knowledge validity proof systems.

## Detailed Design

### Detecting Fraudulent State Transitions

Rollkit blocks contain a field called `Intermediate State Roots` in block data:

```go

// Data defines Rollkit block data.
type Data struct {
	Txs                    Txs
	IntermediateStateRoots IntermediateStateRoots
	Evidence               EvidenceData
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: This will be addressed in #989, as this Data Struct is not up to date.
